IBX-11536: MCP Servers (#3106)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/ai/mcp/mcp_usage.md

---
description: Create custom capabilities for your MCP servers and test them.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

> # MCP server usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Work with MCP servers
```

> MCP Servers LTS Update comes with few [built-in tools](mcp_config.md#built-in-tools).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCP Servers [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates) includes several [built-in tools](mcp_config.md#built-in-tools).
```

> You can create your own capabilities (tools, prompts, and resources) to expose custom features to AI agents through your MCP servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can create your own capabilities (tools, prompts, and resources) to expose custom features to AI agents through your MCP servers.
```

## MCP server capabilities

> The [[= product_name =]] MCP server framework (`ibexa/mcp`) is built on top of [the official PHP SDK for MCP (`mcp/sdk`)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [[= product_name =]] MCP server framework (`ibexa/mcp`) is built on top of the [official PHP SDK for MCP (`mcp/sdk`)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk).
```

> A PHP class implementing MCP server capabilities like tools, prompts, or resources, must:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PHP class that implements MCP server capabilities such as tools, prompts, or resources, must:
```

> - implement [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) to be scanned for capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- implement [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) so that it can be scanned for capabilities
```
or... "its capabilities cen be discovered"?

Author: No, I would not confuse the act of an AI agent discovering the capabilities of an application, and a PHP application self-scanning its own classes for its capabilities.

> - use attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to define capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- use attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to define capabilities
```
define -> declare?

Author: ```suggestion
- use attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to declare capabilities
```

### Tools

The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpTool` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) declares a method as an MCP tool.

> It has several arguments to describe the tool usage and output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It accepts the following optional arguments:
```

- `servers` (optional): an array of identifiers of servers this tool is assigned to - for more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tools-configuration)
- `name` (optional): the name of the tool - if not set, the function name is used as the tool name
- `description` (optional): description of the tool, used by the AI agent to understand the tool's purpose
- `icons` (optional): an array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `outputSchema` (optional): for JSON object output, an associative array describing this object
- `annotations` (optional): a [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance - for more information, see [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations)

> - `meta` (optional): a free-form array for any additional metadata - for more information, see [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `servers` - array of server identifiers the tool is assigned to - for more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tools-configuration)
- `name` - tool name - if not set, function name is used
- `description` - tool description, used by AI agents to understand the tool's purpose
- `icons` - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see the [`icons`specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `outputSchema` - associative array describing a JSON object response
- `annotations` - [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance - for more information, see the [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations)
- `meta` - free-form array for additional metadata - for more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)
```

I'd try to play around to move the second partsto new line, like so:

```
- `servers` - array of server identifiers the tool is assigned to

  For more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tools-configuration)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- `servers` - array of server identifiers the tool is assigned to
  <br>For more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tools-configuration)
- `name` - tool name - if not set, function name is used
- `description` - tool description, used by AI agents to understand the tool's purpose
- `icons` - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances
  <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `outputSchema` - associative array describing a JSON object response
- `annotations` - [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance
  <br>For more information, see the [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations)
- `meta` - free-form array for additional metadata
  <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)
```

An `inputSchema` is automatically built from the function arguments and their types.
To override or complement the automatically generated input schema,
you can use a DocBlock comment with `@param` tags to add descriptions,
or use the [`Schema` attribute](https://github.com/php-mcp/server#-schema-generation-and-validation).

> If an argument is an [enum](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.enumerations.php), its possible values are listed in the schema ([`UntitledSingleSelectEnumSchema`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#untitledsingleselectenumschema)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework automatically builds an `inputSchema` from the method arguments and their types.
To customize or extend the generated schema, you can:

- add descriptions with DocBlock `@param` tags
- use the [`Schema` attribute](https://github.com/php-mcp/server#-schema-generation-and-validation)
 
If an argument is an [enum](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.enumerations.php), its possible values are listed in the schema ([`UntitledSingleSelectEnumSchema`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#untitledsingleselectenumschema)).
```

### Prompts

> MCP servers can also provide [prompt templates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts) to guide the user interacting with the AI having this MCP server at its disposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MCP servers can also provide [prompt templates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts) to help users interact with AI agents connected to the server.
```

> The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpPrompt` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) defines a method as returning a prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods that return a prompt are marked with the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpPrompt` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html).
```

> It has several arguments to describe the prompt usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It accepts several arguments that describe how the prompt is used:
```

- `servers`: an array of identifiers of servers proposing this prompt - notice that this is required for prompts
- `name` (optional): the name of the prompt - if not set, the function name is used as the prompt name
- `description` (optional): a human-readable description of the prompt
- `icons` (optional): an array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)

> - `meta` (optional): a rarely used free-form array for any additional metadata - for more information, see [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `servers` - array of server identifiers exposing this prompt - required for prompts
- `name` (optional) - prompt name - if not set, method name is used
- `description` (optional) - human-readable prompt description
- `icons` (optional) - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `meta` (optional) - free-form array for additional metadata - rarely used, for more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- `servers` - array of server identifiers exposing this prompt - required for prompts
- `name` (optional) - prompt name - if not set, method name is used
- `description` (optional) - human-readable prompt description
- `icons` (optional) - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances
  <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `meta` (optional) - rarely used free-form array for additional metadata
  <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)
```

An `arguments` array is automatically built from the function arguments and their types.
The prompt's function arguments must be strings (to respect the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams)).

> To add descriptions (as in the [`PromptArgument` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#promptargument)), use a DocBlock comment with `@param` tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework automatically builds the arguments array from the method arguments and their types.
Prompt method arguments must be strings to comply with the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams).
To add argument descriptions, use DocBlock `@param` tags as defined by the [`PromptArgument` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#promptargument).
```
The `@param` tag is not mentioned in the schema. Is this the right link?

Author: Yes it's the right link but it's not part of the schema, it's a PHP feature deflected/mapped to schema's `description` feature.

Author: ```suggestion
The framework automatically builds the `arguments` array from the method arguments and their types.
Prompt method arguments must be strings to comply with the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams).
To add argument descriptions, use DocBlock `@param` tags, it's mapped to the `description` defined by the [`PromptArgument` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#promptargument).
```

## Example

> To focus on the MCP server configuration and capabilities creation, this example doesn't even interact with [[= product_name =]] repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the example focused on MCP server configuration and capability creation, it doesn't interact with the [[= product_name =]] repository.
```

### User account

In this example, the MCP server uses JWT tokens created with a dedicated account.

> In [[= product_name =]]'s back office, create a user, for example, in **Guest accounts** user group, with login `ibexa-example`, and password `Ibexa-3xample`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create user account

In this example, the MCP server uses JWT tokens created with a dedicated user account.

In [[= product_name =]]'s back office, create a user in the **Guest accounts** user group, with login `ibexa-example` and password `Ibexa-3xample`.
```

### Configure MCP server

This example introduce an `example` MCP server with a single `greet` tool.
It's enabled on the default repository and all SiteAccesses.
It's accessible with the path `/mcp/example` (for example, on `http://localhost/mcp/example` and `http://localhost/admin/mcp/example`).
It uses files for both discovery cache and session storage.

> (Redis/Valkey would probably be better for session storage in production, but file storage is easier for this example and testing.)

Reviewer 2: I would remove the `probably` here

Author: ```suggestion
(Redis/Valkey would be better for session storage in production, but file storage is easier for this example and testing.)
```

> In a new `config/packages/mcp.yaml` file, define a new MCP server for the `default` repository and assign it to all SiteAccesses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example introduces an MCP server named `example`, with a single tool called `greet`.
The server:

- is enabled on the default repository
- is available in all SiteAccesses
- is accessible with the path `/mcp/example`
  For example:
  - `http://localhost/mcp/example`
  - `http://localhost/admin/mcp/example`
- uses file storage for both discovery cache and sessions

!!! note "Storage choice recommendations"

    Filesystem storage is convenient for the sake of this example and for testing.
    For production, it is recommended that you use Redis or Valkey.

In a new `config/packages/mcp.yaml` file, define a new MCP server for the `default` repository and assign it to all SiteAccesses:
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/config/packages/mcp.yaml') =]]
```

An `ibexa.mcp.example` route is now available:

```bash
php bin/console debug:router ibexa.mcp.example
```

### Create capability class

> An `ExampleCapabilities` class implementing the `McpCapabilityInterface` is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an `ExampleCapabilities` class that implements `McpCapabilityInterface`.
```

It contains a function with an `McpTool` attribute associating it to the `example` server as `greet` tool for the AI.

> It also contains a function with the `McpPrompt` attribute to provide a prompt template to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The class contains:

- a method marked with an `McpTool` attribute that associates it to the `example` server as `greet` tool
- a method marked with an `McpPrompt` attribute that provides a prompt template to users
```

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/src/Mcp/ExampleCapabilities.php') =]]
```

For the example, `servers` attribute parameter is used to associate only this tool to the `example` server.

> All tools from this class could be added to a server by using the `tools` parameter in server configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `servers` attribute parameter associates only this tool with the `example` server.
Alternatively, you can assign all tools from the class to a server by using the `tools` parameter in server configuration.
```

For more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tools-configuration).

> For prompt, the `servers` parameter is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the prompt, the `servers` parameter is required.
```

> So, the example prompt has to use it to be associated with the `example` server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the example prompt must use it to be associated with the `example` server.
```

> During development and testing, you may have to clear the cache to make sure new or modified capabilities are properly re-discovered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During development and testing, you may need to clear the cache to ensure that new or modified capabilities are properly re-discovered.
```

> During development and testing, you may have to clear the cache to make sure new or modified capabilities are properly re-discovered.

Reviewer 2: `/var/share` probably :)

Author: I prefer to recommend commands. No need to know the exact storage location.
I even propose `php bin/console c:c; php bin/console c:p:c --all` few lines bellow to nuke everything.

> In this example, regarding its configuration, `php bin/console cache:pool:clear cache.tagaware.filesystem` has to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, use the following command:

```bash
php bin/console cache:pool:clear cache.tagaware.filesystem`
```
```

!!! tip "Cache clearing"

    Have no mercy for the cache during development. But use the right commands to be sure to delete it.

>     The following pair of commands ensure all types of caches are cleared wherever stored:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    During development, clear caches aggressively.
    The following commands clear all cache types, regardless of where they are stored:
```

    ```bash
    php bin/console cache:clear
    php bin/console cache:pool:clear --all
    ```

### Create MCP server list command

To check the server configuration, a short command using the MCP server configuration registry

> (injected through [`McpServerConfigurationRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpServerConfigurationRegistryInterface.html) and autowiring):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check the MCP server configuration, create a small command that uses the MCP server configuration registry injected through [`McpServerConfigurationRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpServerConfigurationRegistryInterface.html) and autowiring:
```

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/src/Command/McpServerListCommand.php') =]]
```

> ### `curl` test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform `curl` test
```

> To test the `example` MCP server, a sequence of `curl` commands is used to simulate an AI client to MCP server communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test the `example` MCP server, a sequence of `curl` commands is used to simulate the communication between an AI client and the MCP server.
```

- Ask for a [JWT token through REST](/api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#tag/User-Token/operation/api_usertokenjwt_post)
- Initialize a connection to the MCP server
- Validate the MCP Session ID
- List the available tools

> - Call a tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ask for a [JWT token through REST](/api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#tag/User-Token/operation/api_usertokenjwt_post).
- Initialize a connection to the MCP server.
- Validate the MCP Session ID.
- List the available tools.
- Call a tool.
```

`jq`, `grep`, and `sed` are also used to parse or display outputs.

> First, the shell script set the [[= product_name =]] base URL and the user credentials into variables for easier reuse:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, use the shell script to set the [[= product_name =]]'s base URL and user credentials as variables for easier reuse:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 5, 7) =]]
```

> Before communicating with the MCP server, the request of a JWT token through REST API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can communicate with the MCP server, you must first request a JWT token through the REST API:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 9, 23) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 1, 7) =]]
```

> The [initialization](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/lifecycle#initialization) to get an MCP session ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The, perform [initialization](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/lifecycle#initialization) to get an MCP session ID:
```

Author: ```suggestion
Then, perform [initialization](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/lifecycle#initialization) to get an MCP session ID:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 21, 44) =]]
```

``` http
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 8, 16) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 26, 51) =]]
```

> The validation of the initialization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validate the initialization:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 46, 52) =]]
```

``` http
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 52, 56) =]]
```

> The [list of tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools#listing-tools):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get a [list of tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools#listing-tools):
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 54, 61) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 69, 128) =]]
```

> The `greet` [tool call](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools#calling-tools):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Call](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools#calling-tools) the `greet` tool:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 63, 76) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 129, 148) =]]
```

> The [list of prompts](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts#listing-prompts):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get a [list of prompts](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts#listing-prompts):
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 78, 85) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 149, 172) =]]
```

> The `greet` [prompt obtainment](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/prompts#getting-a-prompt):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Get the prompt](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/prompts#getting-a-prompt) of the `greet` method:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 87, 100) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 173, 187) =]]
```

> ### MCP Inspector test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform MCP Inspector test
```

To test your server, you can use the [MCP Inspector](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/tools/inspector).
It's even possible to use it as a DDEV add-on with [`craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector`](https://github.com/craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector).

> You still need to ask for a JWT token through REST or GraphQL, and use it in the MCP Inspector configuration to connect to your server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test your server with the [MCP Inspector](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/tools/inspector).
You can even use the inspector as a DDEV add-on with [`craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector`](https://github.com/craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector).
You still need to ask for a JWT token through REST or GraphQL APIs, and use it in the MCP Inspector configuration to connect to the server.
```

> You can use a Web interface to obtain a JWT token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a Web interface to obtain the JWT token:
```

- [REST live documentation](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-token-obtained-through-rest-documentation)
- [GraphiQL](graphql.md#jwt-authentication)

#### MCP server settings

> To use the MCP Inspector for this example, the settings are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the settings needed to use the MCP Inspector are as follows:
```

- Transport Type: Streamable HTTP
- URL: actual domain and server `path`, for example `http://localhost/mcp/example`
- Connection Type: Via Proxy
- Authentication:
    - Custom Headers:
        - <big>☑</big> `Authorization`
        - `Bearer <JWT token>`
    - OAuth 2.0 Flow: left unedited

> ![Screenshot of the left pannel of the MCP Inspector with the connection settings for the example MCP server](img/mcp-inspector-config.png "MCP Inspector connection settings")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Left panel of MCP Inspector with connection settings for MCP server](img/mcp-inspector-config.png "MCP Inspector connection settings")
```

> #### MCP server test within MCP Inspector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Test MCP server within MCP Inspector
```

In the right panel, in the **Tools** tab, click **List Tools** button in the left column.
The `greet` tool appears preceded by its icon.

> It can be selected and tested in the right column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the right panel, in the **Tools** tab, click **List Tools** in the left column.
The `greet` tool appears, preceded by its icon.
You can select and test it in the right column.
```

> ![Screenshot of the right pannel of the MCP Inspector with the list of tools obtained from the example MCP server, and the test of the `greet` tool](img/mcp-inspector-greet-tool.png "MCP Inspector `greet` tool test")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Right panel of MCP Inspector with a list of tools obtained from MCP server, and the test of the `greet` tool](img/mcp-inspector-greet-tool.png "MCP Inspector `greet` tool test")
```

In the **Prompts** tab, click **List Prompts** button in the left column.
The `greet` prompt appears preceded by its icon.

> It can be selected and tested in the right column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Prompts** tab, in the left column, click **List Prompts**.
The `greet` prompt appears, preceded by its icon.
You can select and test it in the right column.
```

> ![Screenshot of the right pannel of the MCP Inspector with the list of prompts obtained from the example MCP server, and the test of the `greet` prompt](img/mcp-inspector-greet-prompt.png "MCP Inspector `greet` prompt test")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Right panel of MCP Inspector with a list of prompts obtained from the MCP server, and the test of the `greet` prompt](img/mcp-inspector-greet-prompt.png "MCP Inspector `greet` prompt test")
```

> ### Copilot CLI test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform Copilot CLI test
```

> #### MCP server addition to Copilot CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Add MCP server to Copilot CLI
```

For this example test with [Copilot CLI](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/concepts/agents/copilot-cli/about-copilot-cli),
the MCP server configuration is done in an `.mcp.json` file at the [[= product_name =]] project root

> to make it only available for a session opened from there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the sake of the [Copilot CLI](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/concepts/agents/copilot-cli/about-copilot-cli) test in this example, you configure the MCP server in an `.mcp.json` file at the [[= product_name =]] project root.
This way it is only available for a session opened from there.
```

There is two ways of dealing with the JWT token for this test:

- to hard code the JWT token in the configuration and update it at every expiration

> - to wrap JWT token request and MCP server call into a script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can handle the JWT token for this test in the following ways:

- Hard code the JWT token into the configuration and update it at every expiration.
- Wrap a JWT token request and an MCP server call into a script.
```

> ##### Hard coded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Hard coded variant
```

> The hard coded JWT token configuration in `.mcp.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hard coded JWT token configuration in `.mcp.json` looks as follows:
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/http.mcp.json') =]]
```

The `.mcp.json` file must be edited to update the JWT token each time it expires.
You can ask a token using, for example, GraphiQL web interface or a `curl` command, then edit the file manually.

> Or you can have a shell script doing the JWT token request, extracting it from the response, and replace it in the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can request a token by using the GraphiQL web interface or a `curl` command, and then edit the file manually.
Alterenatively, you can configure a shell script to request the JWT token, extract it from the response, and replace it in the file.
```

When Copilot complains that it can't communicate with the MCP server:

- update the JWT token in the `.mcp.json` file
- reload the MCP servers in Copilot CLI with one of those methods:
    - run `/mcp reload` command which reload all MCP servers

>     - run `/mcp disable ibexa-example` then `/mcp enable ibexa-example` to only reload the `ibexa-example` server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update the JWT token in the `.mcp.json` file.
- Reload the MCP servers in Copilot CLI:
    - Run `/mcp reload` command to reload all MCP servers.
    - Run `/mcp disable ibexa-example` and `/mcp enable ibexa-example` to only reload the `ibexa-example` server.
```

> ##### Fully scripted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Fully scripted variant
```

> The wrapping script configuration in `.mcp.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wrapping script configuration in `.mcp.json` looks as follows:
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/stdio.mcp.json') =]]
```

> The `mcp-ibexa-example-wrapper.sh` is a script asking for a JWT token then establishing a connection with the MCP server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mcp-ibexa-example-wrapper.sh` is a script that requests a JWT token and establishes a connection with the MCP server.
```

> The `mcp-ibexa-example-wrapper.sh` is a script asking for a JWT token then establishing a connection with the MCP server.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I have some concerns with providing example testing scripts that touch security. Since MCP ideally should be utilized with OAuth flow and we are not yet there, maybe for our own safety we could skip this part?

> For example, this can be achieved with [Supergateway](https://www.npmjs.com/package/supergateway) without local installation thanks to [`npx`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npx):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, thanks to [`npx`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npx), you can do it with [Supergateway](https://www.npmjs.com/package/supergateway) without a local installation:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp-ibexa-example-wrapper.sh') =]]
```

When Copilot complains that it can't communicate with the MCP server, reload the MCP servers in Copilot CLI with one of those methods:

- run `/mcp reload` command which reload all MCP servers (which can be annoying if you have several MCP servers globally enabled)

> - run `/mcp disable ibexa-example` then `/mcp enable ibexa-example` to only reload the `ibexa-example` server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Copilot complains that it can't communicate with the MCP server, reload the MCP servers in Copilot CLI:

- Run `/mcp reload` command to reload all MCP servers.
- Run `/mcp disable ibexa-example` and `/mcp enable ibexa-example` to only reload the `ibexa-example` server.

!!! note "Reloading multiple MCP servers"

    If you have several MCP servers enabled globally, reloading all of them at the same time can be time consuming.
    Consider reloading them one by one.
```

> #### MCP server test with Copilot CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Run MCP server test with Copilot CLI
```

> Launch Copilot CLI at the project root (where the `.mcp.json` file is located):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Launch Copilot CLI at the project root, where the `.mcp.json` file is located:
```

```bash
cd /path/to/project
copilot
```

If needed, confirm that you trust the files in this folder when prompted (with or without remembering the answer for the future).

> With the command `/mcp show ibexa-example`, you can check server status and details:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If prompted, confirm that you trust the files in this folder.
You may choose to have your choice remembered for the future.

Run the `/mcp show ibexa-example` to check the MCP server status and details:
```

```text
 MCP Server: ibexa-example

 Type:     http
 URL:      http://localhost/mcp/example
 Status:   ✓ Connected
 Source:   /path/to/project/.mcp.json

 Tools (1/1 enabled):
  ✓ greet: Greet a user by name
```

You can prompt Copilot to greet you. It should take the initiative to use the `greet` tool to do so.

- You can ask it "Please, greet me." and it might ask you your name if it doesn't already know it.
- You can additionally give it a name to greet (like in the prompt template).

> During a morning session, the interaction could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can prompt Copilot to greet you.
It should use the `greet` tool to do so.

- You can ask it "Please, greet me." and it might respond with a request for your name if it doesn't already know it.
- You can also give it another name to greet, like in the prompt template.

During a morning session, the interaction could look like this:
```

  └ {"general":"Hello, Pulley!","close":"Hey, Pulley!","morning":"Good morning, P...

● Good morning, Pulley! ☀️

❯ Hi. Please, greet me. We're close friends.

◐ The user wants a close friend greeting. From the previous response, I can see the "close" greeting is "Hey, Pulley!"

● Greet a user (MCP: ibexa-example) · name: "Pulley"
  └ {"general":"Hello, Pulley!","close":"Hey, Pulley!","morning":"Good morning, P...

● Hey, Pulley! 😄

❯ Please, greet someone named "ElePHPant" in a general way (so I could reuse it at any time)

◐ The user wants a general greeting for someone named "ElePHPant".

● greet (MCP: ibexa-example) · name: "ElePHPant"
  └ {"general":"Hello, ElePHPant!","close":"Hey, ElePHPant!","morning":"Good morn...

● Hello, ElePHPant! 🐘

❯ Please, greet someone named "ElePHPant" like it's 22:30

◐ 22:30 is evening time, so I'll use the evening greeting.

● greet (MCP: ibexa-example) · name: "ElePHPant"
  └ {"general":"Hello, ElePHPant!","close":"Hey, ElePHPant!","morning":"Good morn...

● Good evening, ElePHPant! 🌙
```

The Copilot reflexion and its final answer, like the improvised emoji, might differ from this session example.

> The important part is that Copilot CLI thinks to use the `greet` tool, calls it with the right argument, displays the call result, and uses it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Copilot's reflection and its final response, including the improvised emoji, may differ from this example.
The key point is that Copilot CLI decides to use the `greet` tool, calls it with the right argument, displays the call result, and then uses it in its final output.
```

Additionally, you can create your own capabilities (tools, prompts, and resources) to expose custom features to AI agents through your MCP servers.

## MCP server capabilities

The [[= product_name =]] MCP server framework (`ibexa/mcp`) is built on top of the [official PHP SDK for MCP (`mcp/sdk`)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk).

A PHP class that implements MCP server capabilities such as tools, prompts, or resources, must:

- implement [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) so that it can be scanned for capabilities
- use attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to declare capabilities

### Tools

The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpTool` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) declares a method as an MCP tool.
It accepts the following optional arguments:

- `servers` - array of server identifiers the tool is assigned to

>   <br>For more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tool-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see [tools configuration](mcp_config.md#tool-configuration).
```

- `name` - tool name (if not set, function name is used)
- `description` - tool description, used by AI agents to understand the tool's purpose
- `icons` - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances

>   <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons).
```

- `outputSchema` - associative array describing a JSON object response
- `annotations` - [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance

>   <br>For more information, see the [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see the [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations).
```

- `meta` - free-form array for additional metadata

>   <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta).
```

The framework automatically builds an `inputSchema` from the method arguments and their types.
To customize or extend the generated schema, you can:

- add descriptions with DocBlock `@param` tags

> - use the [`Schema` attribute](https://github.com/php-mcp/server#-schema-generation-and-validation)
>  
> If an argument is an [enum](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.enumerations.php), its possible values are listed in the schema ([`UntitledSingleSelectEnumSchema`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#untitledsingleselectenumschema)).

Author: ```suggestion
- use the [`Schema` attribute](https://github.com/php-mcp/server#-schema-generation-and-validation)

If an argument is an [enum](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.enumerations.php), its possible values are listed in the schema ([`UntitledSingleSelectEnumSchema`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#untitledsingleselectenumschema)).
```

### Prompts

MCP servers can also provide [prompt templates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts) to help users interact with AI agents connected to the server.

Methods that return a prompt are marked with the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpPrompt` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html).

It accepts several arguments that describe how the prompt is used:

- `servers` - array of server identifiers exposing this prompt - required for prompts
- `name` (optional) - prompt name - if not set, method name is used
- `description` (optional) - human-readable prompt description
- `icons` (optional) - array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances

>   <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see the [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons).
```

- `meta` (optional) - rarely used free-form array for additional metadata

>   <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For more information, see the [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta).
```

The framework automatically builds the `arguments` array from the method arguments and their types.
Prompt method arguments must be strings to comply with the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams).
To add argument descriptions, use DocBlock `@param` tags, it's mapped to the `description` defined by the [`PromptArgument` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#promptargument).

## Example

To keep the example focused on MCP server configuration and capability creation, it doesn't interact with the [[= product_name =]] repository.

### Create user account

In this example, the MCP server uses JWT tokens created with a dedicated user account.

In [[= product_name =]]'s back office, create a user in the **Guest accounts** user group, with login `ibexa-example` and password `Ibexa-3xample`.

### Configure MCP server

This example introduces an MCP server named `example`, with a single tool called `greet`.
The server:

- is enabled on the default repository
- is available in all SiteAccesses
- is accessible with the path `/mcp/example`

>   For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br>For example:
```
You added a line break in another place and it helped adjust the text.
